---
layout: post
date: 2022-12-16
excerpt: |
  It's easier to perform well in a group if your social environment
  considers you to be a good performer.
title: Role of bias in success
vim: spell spelllang=en_us
---

About a year ago my mum told me about a TV program called "Projekt Lady"
(english version of this is called "Ladette to Lady"). As far as I understood,
the premise was that several young people were selected for a special training
that made them behave as if they were aristocrats. At first, I felt it was quite
amusing. Then a bit awful[^1]. But it is an example of how a person's behavior
can change with proper motivation.

People make quick judgments about others that are more often rationalized than
changed. We notice this quite early in our lives which is why making a good
first impression is a very common manipulation. But the list of [cognitive
biases] is *very* long. And being able to exploit them makes it much easier to
traverse the social hierarchy.

## Personal story: University

I remember that during the first year of my computer science studies, I prepared
for all the classes, participated in all the lectures and tried to complete as
many tasks from the excercise lists as possible. I would always be willing to
stand in front of a blackboard, answer any questions and get very good grades.
This made me somewhat recognizable among the scientific staff.

In the third year of my studies, I started working part-time. The quality of my
education would deteriorate very quickly. I spent much less time preparing for
anything, exams included. My grades got a bit worse. But that didn't matter. I
had [full confidence] I'd be able to complete my coursework no matter what
happened.

Near the end of the academic year I got a cool offer to go to Switzerland for a
six months long internship. There was a catch, though. I'd have to start one
month before the end of the year exams. No problem! A few short conversations
here and there, plus I had to submit some projects a bit earlier, and that's
it.[^2] In their eyes I was a [good student] after all. The job experience that
[I managed to secure] helps me profoundly throughout my adult life to this day.

Would I be able to achieve the same if [I were] an average student? Maybe. But I
doubt I'd have it in me to even try to fight for this kind of special treatment.
Why would I? The unviersity statue already tells me that it's impossible. It
sounds [unjust] to even consider such action.

## Personal story: Middle school

During the first semester of my middle school I had a math teacher that caught
me once on not paying attention to what he was saying. In his eyes I was just
[too stupid] to understand what was going on. After ridiculing and humiliating
me in front of the class for the rest of the lesson, he would advise my parents
to reassign me to another school.

In my eyes this served as an [anchor] through which others would perceive me.
Seeing an authoritative adult aggressively offending a child by other children
doesn't do much good, I'll tell you that much. I got bullied a lot, had very
poor grades and was not encouraged by anyone to pursue any challenging
educational goal. Nobody would talk to me for the sheer joy of having a
conversation[^3].

Trying to change anybody's opinion that was so strongly rooted was a very [slow
process]. Over many years I was able to achieve it with a few people that are
friends with me now. But most would disregard my problem, as it [did not affect
them].

## The role of bias

The clear difference between the two stories above is [the social environment]
that I was a part of. In total, we can observe at least eight different biases
at play, each marked with a hyperlink to a Wikipedia website with an
explanation[^4]. Together, they are the means through which social reality was
shaped for me. Having a good relationship with friends and colleagues enabled me
to pursue goals that had a highly positive impact on my life. Not having such
privilege makes everything all too hard.

The way I felt others perceived me had a very strong influence on my behavior.
In psychology this is called a [self-fulfilling prophecy]. The most common and
dangerous offshoot of this mechanism is [stereotype threat], where an individual
from a stereotyped group performs noticeably below their capabilities. This is,
in particular, a difficult challenge for certain minorities, and we should all
be aware of this.

This experience is very [valuable and helpful] to me as an adult. It has a
particular influence on my life because of the following conclusion:

**It's easier to switch social environments than to fight against negative
biases other people have against you. On the other hand, sometimes such a
situation may be caused by real issues that can use some fixing. So the
following rule of thumb applies: if it's worth it, stay and fight until the
situation stops improving or you stop developing. Then switch.**

There is no such person that achieved enormous success as a result of their
inner traits alone. We are social creatures and thrive when having support from
others. [Now you know. And knowing is half the battle.]

[^1]: Who needs aristocrats (except aristocrats)?

[^2]: Without a doubt I wouldn't be able to pull that off if not for the support
    from other students. Thank you again!

[^3]: Except for the said math teacher at some point, surprisingly.

[^4]: This paragraph contains five more.

  [cognitive biases]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_cognitive_biases
  [full confidence]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overconfidence_effect
  [good student]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confirmation_bias
  [I managed to secure]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusion_of_control
  [I were]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/False-uniqueness_effect
  [unjust]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just-world_hypothesis
  [too stupid]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fundamental_attribution_error
  [anchor]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anchoring_(cognitive_bias)
  [slow process]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conservatism_(belief_revision)
  [did not affect them]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Survivorship_bias
  [the social environment]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-serving_bias
  [self-fulfilling prophecy]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-fulfilling_prophecy
  [stereotype threat]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stereotype_threat
  [valuable and helpful]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Effort_justification
  [Now you know. And knowing is half the battle.]: https://youtu.be/sO9xwAyeWX0
