---
layout: post
date: 2023-06-28
excerpt: |
  Use Syncthing for synchronizing all files between your computers except
  for code development workspaces - unless you’re in for some tinkering.
title: Synchronizing code development workspace with Syncthing
vim: spell spelllang=en_us
---

I switch between my desktop PC and laptop quite often, especially when I work
and travel. This needs to be a frictionless process as otherwise I could lose
work progress or simply get discouraged from using the best tool for the job.
Achieving convenience in this matter had cost me a bit of effort, but the result
is well worth the price.

The easiest solution would be to use the PC as a server and connect to it
whenever I work from another device. This doesn’t suit me for the following
reasons:

- I don’t always have the best internet connection and need to be able to access
  the data offline.
- I write for various platforms and need to be able to run stuff on a locally
  connected device.
- [Latency matters][]. It’s exhausting to code over an SSH session for me.
  Running stuff in the browser solves this issue partially, but web technology
  adds to the delay on its own.

The proper solution is to replicate the state between the computers and use them
as independent devices. For that purpose, I decided to use [Syncthing][]. It’s
an open-source, performant, and easy-to-use tool suited for continuous file
synchronization.

## Synchronizing configuration

I expect the programming setup to be the same on every computer I use. With the
help of [Nix][] and [Home Manager][], this is the easiest thing to achieve. All
the declarative configuration is stored in a [git repository][]. It’s not the
fanciest[^1] dotfiles project but is simple enough and gets the job done.
Whenever I need to make some changes, I edit the config and push it. When I want
to update the system on some device I just pull and rebuild it.

## Synchronizing regular data (documents, pictures, etc.)

This is where Syncthing shines the most. [The configuration][] is plain and
simple. The overall setup consists of another computer that runs 24/7 and
contains its own copy of all the files. This yields two benefits: I don’t need
to have other computers turned on simultaneously to sync them, and I can have an
easy backup system[^2] that runs on a single machine.

## Synchronizing workspace

All the projects that I work on have a root in a single directory
(`~/Workspace`). Files there have high churn relative to the rest of the
filesystem. Aside from making small, manual changes, there are also various
byproducts of compilations, dependency fetching, or other processes related to
building a program.

The most popular way of syncing project data is to use a version control system
(duh). I use `git` for almost all the work, but it’s not what I want here. It
does give me the benefit of [ignoring][] anything that I don’t care about, is
highly reliable and somewhat of an industry standard. But I don’t want to be
forced to commit and push whenever I plan to stop working on a particular
device. And I sometimes work on stuff that doesn’t need any version control.

Using Syncthing like in the case of regular data is also not a solution.
Tracking all the changes to the build files would kill my laptop battery and
cause heavy network traffic - which is not nice when using mobile internet.
Although such a solution [is discouraged][], this tool can be adapted to handle
this use case by leveraging its [ignoring mechanism][].

### stignore and gitignore

Syncthing ignore file (`.stignore`) syntax is loosely modeled on gitignore.
There are a few quirks and differences. Here are some examples:

- `.stignore` must be placed in the root of the synced directory. Any other
  ignore file won’t be processed. All the rules must be relative to the
  directory root.
- If a negation (`!`) happens after related parent directory is ignored then it
  will have no effect.
- `.stignore` file isn’t synced (it’s ignored on its own). `a/**/b` will not
  match `a/b`.
- `a**b` is a valid regex in Syncthing and will match `a/b`, `ab`, `a/c/b`.

I wrote a simple Python script that merges all the unignored `.gitignore` files
and makes them relative to the workspace root directory. The resulting file is
stored as `stignore`, which is, in turn, statically linked as `.stignore` and
thus synced between devices. Here is its outline[^3]:

``` python
from gitignore_parser import parse_gitignore

matchers = []

def matches(path: str) -> bool:
    return any(matcher(path) for matcher in matchers)

for gitignore_path in glob("**/.gitignore", recursive=True, include_hidden=True):
    if matches(gitignore_path):
        continue
    matchers.append(parse_gitignore(gitignore_path, base_dir=os.getcwd()))

    with open(gitignore_path) as gitignore:
        gitignore_dir_path = os.path.dirname(gitignore_path)
        for line in gitignore.readlines():
            line = line.strip()

            if not line or line.startswith("#"):
                continue

            if line.startswith("!"):
                print("!", end="")
                line = line[1:]

            if line.startswith("/"):
                print(f"{gitignore_dir_path}{line}")
                continue

            if "/" in line and line[-1] != "/":
                print(f"{gitignore_dir_path}/{line}")
                continue

            print(f"{gitignore_dir_path}/{line}")
            print(f"{gitignore_dir_path}/**/{line}")
```

### Watching for changes

The script above works well for processing all the `.gitignore` files. Another
problem is to run it only when necessary.

The most straightforward solution would be to run it periodically, but it has a
significant flaw. Whatever the time interval is, Syncthing may begin syncing
files before `.stignore` regeneration. This will cause conflicts when the
directory is removed - other devices won’t know what to do with it as ignored
files are already there. And, of course, it adds a lot of unnecessary I/O
traffic.

A better solution is to watch for file changes and run the script whenever some
`.gitignore` is modified. The most popular tool for that purpose that I’ve read
about is [entr][], but it doesn’t trigger when a new file is added. Another
solution is to use [systemd’s path unit][], but it doesn’t monitor the directory
recursively. Finally, I found out about `inotifywait` (part of
[inotify-tools][]) which is able to monitor for specific file events at some
directory, recursively. All that was left was to enable a small systemd service
running the following script:

``` sh
inotifywait --format "%f" -e 'modify,moved_to,create,delete' -m -r ~/Workspace |
  while read line; do
    if [[ "$line" == ".gitignore" ]]; then
      echo ".gitignore update"
      # 1. Run the Python script
      # 2. Check if there is any content difference against current stignore.
      #    If there is then replace it.
    fi
  done
```

This causes a lot of file watches to be started. Fortunately, this is offloaded
to the server machine, so I never worry about it on a computer I work with. A
better solution could be to utilize Syncthing API and monitor for changes
there[^4]. But for the time being, I’m happy with what I have.

[^1]: I use flakes only with [devenv][]. Sue me.

[^2]: All the important files are synced to [GCS nearline storage][] every month
    using [Restic][]. Also, Syncthing has its own [file versioning][].

[^3]: Full version is available as [GitHub gist][].

[^4]: There is actually a project that facilitates it: [stfed][].

  [Latency matters]: https://pavelfatin.com/typing-with-pleasure/
  [Syncthing]: https://syncthing.net/
  [Nix]: https://nixos.org/
  [Home Manager]: https://github.com/nix-community/home-manager
  [git repository]: https://github.com/jupblb/nix-config
  [The configuration]: https://github.com/jupblb/nix-config/blob/main/nixos/syncthing.nix
  [ignoring]: https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore
  [is discouraged]: https://forum.syncthing.net/t/gitignore-stignore/5746/3
  [ignoring mechanism]: https://docs.syncthing.net/users/ignoring.html
  [entr]: https://github.com/eradman/entr
  [systemd’s path unit]: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.path.html
  [inotify-tools]: https://github.com/inotify-tools/inotify-tools
  [devenv]: https://devenv.sh/
  [GCS nearline storage]: https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/storage-classes#nearline
  [Restic]: https://restic.net/
  [file versioning]: https://docs.syncthing.net/users/versioning.html
  [GitHub gist]: https://gist.github.com/jupblb/29ecddc367747bce4026de69743f299a
  [stfed]: https://github.com/desbma/stfed
