---
layout: post
date: 2023-04-10
excerpt: |
  NVIDIA Linux drivers still suck and don’t work well with Wayland. This
  can be mitigated by using iGPU with dGPU offloading.
title: NVIDIA and Wayland
vim: spell spelllang=en_us
---

Nvidia has little popularity among Linux users. It’d feel weird to not quote
famous words by Linus Torvalds that it [“has been the single worst company \[the
Linux developers have\] ever dealt with”][1]. While I’m not a kernel developer,
my experience with their GPU driver as a user is so bad that I consider it to be
the main cause of me switching to NixOS - because of easy rollbacks.

My AMD Radeon RX 580 was 4 years old last year. I never had a single issue with
its driver as it is [an in-tree kernel module][] and didn’t require installing
any proprietary blob. My desktop setup is GNOME using Wayland session[^1]
running on [a HiDPI display][].

To make a long story a bit shorter: at some point I needed a new GPU and I
needed it fast. GeForce series 40 and Radeon RX 7000 series were just about to
release their cards. I enjoyed my experience with AMD but was in a rush, Nvidia
was releasing their products sooner, and I ordered RTX 4080 on a Black Friday
sale.

## Driver issues

I hoped that Nvidia support for Linux has improved in recent years. This is
true, to some extent. Generic Buffer Management has been supported since driver
version 495 which made it possible to use any Wayland compositor. They have
released [an open-source kernel module][] (that still runs proprietary code).
The gaming performance is almost [on pair with Windows][].

But then I encountered the following issues:

- No support for HiDPI TTY framebuffer as there is no fbdriver support. This
  also affects [KMSCON][].
- Modesetting via `nvidia_drm.modeset=1` screwed up my flicker-free boot process
  ([plymouth][]).
- GNOME Display Manager (GDM) wouldn’t show an option to run Wayland session
  without the open-source kernel module that is considered to be less stable
  than the proprietary driver.
- [GAMMA_LUT support is missing][] which disables shifting screen colors to red.
  This is known in GNOME as “night light” and in iOS as “night shift”.
- Many applications do not support Nvidia hardware video decoding ([NVDEC][]).

Another thing that negatively surprised me is that Proton does not support
features like ray-tracing or DLSS out of the box. Fortunately, this was easy to
fix with a few flags[^2].

After reading Reddit for a few <s>minutes</s> hours it was obvious to me that
there is no easy fix for all of the above. Moreover, I enjoy using Wayland and
was saddened by a fact that `wlroots`, a highly popular dependency for writing
Wayland window managers, [does not work well with Nvidia][]. And it seems that
work that aims to improve that is [moving slow][].

## Solution

Ten years ago one of major sources of pain for Linux users was a new feature
used in laptops called [“Nvidia Optimus”][]. It improved battery life of a
computer by running most graphic computations on GPU integrated with CPU (iGPU)
and offloading processing demanding applications, usually games, to a dedicated
Nvidia GPU (dGPU). That is, the computer would run desktop environment on an
iGPU but The Witcher 2 would render on dGPU with output image being sent back to
iGPU memory so that it could be presented on a display.

Most people that I knew back then that used Linux as their primary operating
system decided to disable their dedicated GPUs on BIOS level. Some, such as me,
would use third-party software ([“bumblebee”][]) to run selected software
manually on dGPU. Such a setup would break very often. It was hell. Now it’s a
new hope for PC desktop users.

Since 2016 Nvidia driver supports Linux PRIME offloading which is a successor to
Optimus that supports various GPU vendors and has a much better support. I know
it may not sound very intuitive, but it’s actually a great solution for the
problems above.

Let’s run Linux on integrated GPU that has very good driver quality and offload
gaming to the Nvidia card. I’ve tried this and the results are above
expectations. There is no performance penalty that I’m aware of. All the issues
mentioned before are mitigated. I’m almost certain that my power consumption is
now on a bit lower level.

Here is a relevant set of settings that I use on [my NixOS machine][]. Part of
it is taken from [NixOS wiki][]. I’m sure it’s not difficult to apply this on
any other Linux OS.

``` nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }: {
  # Enable Intel iGPU early in the boot process
  boot.initrd.kernelModules = [ "i915" ];

  environment.systemPackages =
    # Running `nvidia-offload vlc` would run VLC with dGPU
    let nvidia-offload = pkgs.writeShellScriptBin "nvidia-offload" ''
      export __NV_PRIME_RENDER_OFFLOAD=1
      export __NV_PRIME_RENDER_OFFLOAD_PROVIDER=NVIDIA-G0
      export __GLX_VENDOR_LIBRARY_NAME=nvidia
      export __VK_LAYER_NV_optimus=NVIDIA_only

      exec "$@"
    '';
    in [ nvidia-offload ];

  hardware.nvidia = {
    # Drivers must be at verion 525 or newer
    package = config.boot.kernelPackages.nvidiaPackages.beta;
    prime   = {
      offload.enable = true;        # Enable PRIME offloading
      intelBusId     = "PCI:0:2:0"; # lspci | grep VGA | grep Intel
      nvidiaBusId    = "PCI:1:0:0"; # lspci | grep VGA | grep NVIDIA
    };
  };

  home-manager.users.jupblb = { lib, pkgs, ... }: {
    # Overwrite steam.desktop shortcut so that is uses PRIME
    # offloading for Steam and all its games
    home.activation.steam = lib.hm.dag.entryAfter ["writeBoundary"] ''
      $DRY_RUN_CMD sed 's/^Exec=/&nvidia-offload /' \
        ${pkgs.steam}/share/applications/steam.desktop \
        > ~/.local/share/applications/steam.desktop
      $DRY_RUN_CMD chmod +x ~/.local/share/applications/steam.desktop
    '';
  };

  services.xserver.videoDrivers = [ "nvidia" ];
}
```

There are two disadvantages to this solution:

1.  An app must be running with `nvidia-offload` in order to utilise dGPU.
2.  Number and resolution of displays connected to the PC is limited by the
    motherboard I/O.

Personally, I use a single 4k display and need the dedicated GPU for games only.
If you are also so lucky and suffer from similar issues with Nvidia drivers then
this is the way.

[^1]: It’s better than X11 because of the tear-free experience.

[^2]: My Steam launch options secret sauce is
    `PROTON_ENABLE_NVAPI=1 VKD3D_CONFIG=dxr PROTON_HIDE_NVIDIA_GPU=0`.

  [1]: https://youtu.be/MShbP3OpASA?t=2997
  [an in-tree kernel module]: https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/latest/gpu/amdgpu/index.html
  [a HiDPI display]: https://jupblb.prose.sh/astigmatism
  [an open-source kernel module]: https://github.com/NVIDIA/open-gpu-kernel-modules
  [on pair with Windows]: https://www.phoronix.com/review/nvidia2022-windows11-linux/8
  [KMSCON]: https://github.com/Aetf/kmscon
  [plymouth]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plymouth_(software)
  [GAMMA_LUT support is missing]: https://github.com/NVIDIA/open-gpu-kernel-modules/issues/162
  [NVDEC]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Hardware_video_acceleration#Application_support
  [does not work well with Nvidia]: https://github.com/NVIDIA/open-gpu-kernel-modules/issues/318
  [moving slow]: https://gitlab.freedesktop.org/wlroots/wlroots/-/merge_requests/4055
  [“Nvidia Optimus”]: https://www.nvidia.com/en-us/geforce/technologies/optimus/technology/
  [“bumblebee”]: https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/bumblebee
  [my NixOS machine]: https://github.com/jupblb/nix-config/blob/main/hades.nix
  [NixOS wiki]: https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Nvidia#Nvidia_PRIME
